Added solution file for usaco-1040 (#2746)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/usaco-1040.mdx

---
id: usaco-1040
source: USACO Silver 2021 Open
title: The Moo Particle
author: Mythreya Dharani
---
## Explanation
Let's assume we have a bidirectional graph where any two particles that can interact are connected. 
We can make the claim that the answer is the number of connected components $c$ in our graph. 
This is true because we can reduce every connected component to one node in the graph by removing all nodes, moving inwards until we reach a single chosen node to keep.

> However, there are at most $10^5$ particles, and therefore, we need a way to calculate $c$ in less than $\mathcal{O}(N^2)$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since there can be up to $10^5$ particles, we need a way to calculate $c$ in less than $\mathcal{O}(N^2)$. 
```

> We can make a $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ algorithm by sorting every particle in ascending order, first by its $x$ spin, and then by its $y$ spin, resulting in a list $p_1,  p_2.. p_{N-1},  p_{N}$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can make a $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$ algorithm by sorting every particle in ascending order, first by its $x$ spin, and then by its $y$ spin.
```
unused

Each element is intially its own connected component. From there, for each adjacent connected component, as long as the minimum y-coordinate in the left component is at most the maximum y-coordinate of the right component, we combine them together.

> For some intution on this algorithm's correctness, since the list is already sorted by x-coordinates, by comparing the minimum of the component with smaller y-coordinates and the maximum of the component with greater y-coordinates, we can uniquely determine whether or not they belong to the same connected component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For some intution on this algorithm's correctness, since the list is already sorted by x-coordinates, by comparing the minimum of the component with smaller y-coordinates and the maximum of the component with greater y-coordinates, we can determine whether or not they belong to the same connected component.
```

## Implementation

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal{O}(N \log N)$

<LanguageSection>
	
<JavaSection>
	
```java
import java.util.*;
import java.io.*;
public class TheMooParticle {
	public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException

> 	{

Reviewer: keep braces on the same line:

ex:
```
for (thingy in things) {
    fdsfasfsadfasdfaf
}
```

		Kattio io = new Kattio("moop");

> 		int n = io.nextInt(); //number of particles

Reviewer: format all comments like:

```
// comment
```

		ArrayList<Integer> x = new ArrayList<>();; //x coordinates
		ArrayList<Integer> y = new ArrayList<>();; //y coordinates
		ArrayList<Integer> components = new ArrayList<>();

> 		for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)

Reviewer: space it out

		{
			x.add(io.nextInt());
			y.add(io.nextInt());
			components.add(i);
		}
		Collections.sort(components, new Comparator<Integer> ()
		{         
			public int compare(Integer p1, Integer p2) //sorts by x, then y
			{
				if (x.get(p1) == x.get(p2))
				{
					return y.get(p1).compareTo(y.get(p2));
				}
				return x.get(p1).compareTo(x.get(p2));
			}
		}
		);
		int[] minLeft = new int[100000]; //stores min y-coordinate for left comp
		int[] maxRight = new int[100000]; //stores max y-coordinate for right comp
		minLeft[0] = y.get(components.get(0));
		for (int i = 1; i < n; i++)
		{
			//calculates minLeft using prefix array
			minLeft[i] = Math.min(minLeft[i - 1], y.get(components.get(i))); 
		}
		maxRight[n - 1] = y.get(components.get(n - 1));
		for (int i = n - 2; i >= 0; i--)
		{
			//calculates maxRight using suffix array
			maxRight[i] = Math.max(maxRight[i + 1], y.get(components.get(i))); 
		}

> 		int numComponents = 1; //this is our answer

Reviewer: comment is unnecessary
